---
title: Cybercrime
source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cybercrime
---

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Cybercrime, or computer oriented crime, is crime that involves a
computer and a network.[1] The computer may have been used in the
commission of a crime, or it may be the target.[2] Cybercrimes can be
defined as: "Offences that are committed against individuals or groups
of individuals with a criminal motive to intentionally harm the
reputation of the victim or cause physical or mental harm, or loss, to
the victim directly or indirectly, using modern telecommunication
networks such as Internet (networks including but not limited to Chat
rooms, emails, notice boards and groups) and mobile phones
(Bluetooth/SMS/MMS)".[3] Cybercrime may threaten a person or a
nation's security and financial health.[4] Issues surrounding these
types of crimes have become high-profile, particularly those
surrounding hacking, copyright infringement, unwarranted
mass-surveillance, sextortion, child pornography, and child
grooming.[3] There are also problems of privacy when confidential
information is intercepted or disclosed, lawfully or
otherwise. Debarati Halder and K. Jaishankar further define cybercrime
from the perspective of gender and defined 'cybercrime against women'
as "Crimes targeted against women with a motive to intentionally harm
the victim psychologically and physically, using modern
telecommunication networks such as internet and mobile phones".[3]
Internationally, both governmental and non-state actors engage in
cybercrimes, including espionage, financial theft, and other
cross-border crimes. Cybercrimes crossing international borders and
involving the actions of at least one nation state is sometimes
referred to as cyberwarfare.

A report (sponsored by McAfee) estimates that the annual damage to the
global economy is at $445 billion;[5] however, a Microsoft report
shows that such survey-based estimates are "hopelessly flawed" and
exaggerate the true losses by orders of magnitude.[6][third-party
source needed] Approximately $1.5 billion was lost in 2012 to online
credit and debit card fraud in the US.[7] In 2016, a study by Juniper
Research estimated that the costs of cybercrime could be as high as
2.1 trillion by 2019.[8][third-party source needed]

## Classification

Computer crime encompasses a broad range of activities.[9]

**Financial fraud crimes**

Main article: Internet fraud

Computer fraud is any dishonest misrepresentation of fact intended to
let another to do or refrain from doing something which causes
loss. In this context, the fraud will result in obtaining a benefit
by:

- Altering in an unauthorized way. This requires little technical expertise and is common form of theft by employees altering the data before entry or entering false data, or by entering unauthorized instructions or using unauthorized processes;
- Altering, destroying, suppressing, or stealing output, usually to conceal unauthorized transactions. This is difficult to detect;
- Altering or deleting stored data;

Other forms of fraud may be facilitated using computer systems,
including bank fraud, carding, identity theft, extortion, and theft of
classified information.

A variety of internet scams, many based on phishing and social
engineering, target consumers and businesses.

**Cyberterrorism**

Main article: Cyberterrorism

Government officials and information technology security specialists
have documented a significant increase in Internet problems and server
scans since early 2001. But there is a growing concern among
government agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI)
and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) that such intrusions are
part of an organized effort by cyberterrorists, foreign intelligence
services, or other groups to map potential security holes in critical
systems.[10] A cyberterrorist is someone who intimidates or coerces a
government or an organization to advance his or her political or
social objectives by launching a computer-based attack against
computers, networks, or the information stored on them.

Cyberterrorism in general can be defined as an act of terrorism
committed through the use of cyberspace or computer resources (Parker
1983). As such, a simple propaganda piece in the Internet that there
will be bomb attacks during the holidays can be considered
cyberterrorism. There are also hacking activities directed towards
individuals, families, organized by groups within networks, tending to
cause fear among people, demonstrate power, collecting information
relevant for ruining peoples' lives, robberies, blackmailing etc.[11]

**Cyberextortion**

Main article: Extortion

Cyber-extortion occurs when a website, e-mail server, or computer
system is subjected to or threatened with repeated denial of service
or other attacks by malicious hackers. These hackers demand money in
return for promising to stop the attacks and to offer
"protection". According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
cyber-crime extortionists are increasingly attacking corporate
websites and networks, crippling their ability to operate and
demanding payments to restore their service. More than 20 cases are
reported each month to the FBI and many go unreported in order to keep
the victim's name out of the public domain. Perpetrators typically use
a distributed denial-of-service attack.[12]

An example of cyberextortion was the attack on Sony Pictures of
2014.[13]

**Cyberwarfare**

Main article: Cyberwarfare

The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) notes that the cyberspace has
emerged as a national-level concern through several recent events of
geo-strategic significance. Among those are included, the attack on
Estonia's infrastructure in 2007, allegedly by Russian hackers. "In
August 2008, Russia again allegedly conducted cyberattacks, this time
in a coordinated and synchronized kinetic and non-kinetic campaign
against the country of Georgia. The December 2015 Ukraine power grid
cyberattack has also been attributed to Russia and is considered the
first successful cyberattack on a power grid.[citation needed] Fearing
that such attacks may become the norm in future warfare among
nation-states, the concept of cyberspace operations impacts and will
be adapted by warfighting military commanders in the future.[14]

**Computer as a target**

These crimes are committed by a selected group of criminals. Unlike
crimes using the computer as a tool, these crimes require the
technical knowledge of the perpetrators. As such, as technology
evolves, so too does the nature of the crime. These crimes are
relatively new, having been in existence for only as long as computers
have—which explains how unprepared society and the world in general is
towards combating these crimes. There are numerous crimes of this
nature committed daily on the internet:

Crimes that primarily target computer networks or devices include:

- Computer viruses
- Denial-of-service attacks
- Malware (malicious code)

**Computer as a tool**

Main articles: Internet fraud, Spamming, Phishing, and Carding (fraud)

When the individual is the main target of cybercrime, the computer can
be considered as the tool rather than the target. These crimes
generally involve less technical expertise. Human weaknesses are
generally exploited. The damage dealt is largely psychological and
intangible, making legal action against the variants more
difficult. These are the crimes which have existed for centuries in
the offline world. Scams, theft, and the likes have existed even
before the development in high-tech equipment. The same criminal has
simply been given a tool which increases his potential pool of victims
and makes him all the harder to trace and apprehend.[15]

Crimes that use computer networks or devices to advance other ends include: 

- Fraud and identity theft (although this increasingly uses malware, hacking or phishing, making it an example of both "computer as target" and "computer as tool" crime)
- Information warfare
- Phishing scams
- Spam
- Propagation of illegal obscene or offensive content, including
  harassment and threats
  
The unsolicited sending of bulk email for commercial purposes (spam)
is unlawful in some jurisdictions.

Phishing is mostly propagated via email. Phishing emails may contain
links to other websites that are affected by malware.[16] Or, they may
contain links to fake online banking or other websites used to steal
private account information.

*Obscene or offensive content*

The content of websites and other electronic communications may be
distasteful, obscene or offensive for a variety of reasons. In some
instances these communications may be legal.

The extent to which these communications are unlawful varies greatly
between countries, and even within nations. It is a sensitive area in
which the courts can become involved in arbitrating between groups
with strong beliefs.

One area of Internet pornography that has been the target of the
strongest efforts at curtailment is child pornography, which is
illegal in most jurisdictions in the world.

*Online harassment*

See also: Cyberbullying, Online predator, Cyberstalking, and Internet troll

Whereas content may be offensive in a non-specific way, harassment
directs obscenities and derogatory comments at specific individuals
focusing for example on gender, race, religion, nationality, sexual
orientation. This often occurs in chat rooms, through newsgroups, and
by sending hate e-mail to interested parties. Harassment on the
internet also includes revenge porn.

There are instances where committing a crime using a computer can lead
to an enhanced sentence. For example, in the case of United States
v. Neil Scott Kramer, Kramer was served an enhanced sentence according
to the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual §2G1.3(b)(3)[17] for his use
of a cell phone to "persuade, induce, entice, coerce, or facilitate
the travel of, the minor to engage in prohibited sexual conduct."
Kramer argued that this claim was insufficient because his charge
included persuading through a computer device and his cellular phone
technically is not a computer. Although Kramer tried to argue this
point, U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual states that the term computer
"means an electronic, magnetic, optical, electrochemically, or other
high speed data processing device performing logical, arithmetic, or
storage functions, and includes any data storage facility or
communications facility directly related to or operating in
conjunction with such device."[18]

Connecticut was the U.S. state to pass a statute making it a criminal
offense to harass someone by computer. Michigan, Arizona, and Virginia
and South Carolina[19] have also passed laws banning harassment by
electronic means.[20][21]

Harassment as defined in the U.S. computer statutes is typically
distinct from cyberbullying, in that the former usually relates to a
person's "use a computer or computer network to communicate obscene,
vulgar, profane, lewd, lascivious, or indecent language, or make any
suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature, or threaten any illegal
or immoral act," while the latter need not involve anything of a
sexual nature.

Although freedom of speech is protected by law in most democratic
societies (in the US this is done by the First Amendment), it does not
include all types of speech. In fact spoken or written "true threat"
speech/text is criminalized because of "intent to harm or intimidate",
that also applies for online or any type of network related threats in
written text or speech.[22] The US Supreme Court definition of "true
threat" is "statements where the speaker means to communicate a
serious expression of an intent to commit an act of unlawful violence
to a particular individual or group".[22]

*Drug trafficking*

Darknet markets are used to buy and sell recreational drugs
online. Some drug traffickers use encrypted messaging tools to
communicate with drug mules. The dark web site Silk Road was a major
online marketplace for drugs before it was shut down by law
enforcement (then reopened under new management, and then shut down by
law enforcement again). After Silk Road 2.0 went down, Silk Road 3
Reloaded emerged. However, it was just an older marketplace named
Diabolus Market, that used the name for more exposure from the brand's
previous success.[23] 
