---
title: 考据：《G弦上的咏叹调》真的可以用一根弦拉出来吗？
---

[Air on the G String -
Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_on_the_G_String)

"Air on the G String" is August Wilhelmj's arrangement of the second
movement in Johann Sebastian Bach's Orchestral Suite No. 3 in D major,
BWV 1068.

**The arrangement differs from the original in that the part of the
first violins is transposed down so that it can be played entirely on
a violin's lowest string, i.e., the G string. It is played by a single
violin (instead of by the first violins as a group). ***

**Bach's original**

Bach's third Orchestral Suite in D major, composed in the first half
of the 18th century, has an "Air" as second movement, following its
French overture opening movement. The suite is composed for three
trumpets, timpani, two oboes, strings (two violin parts and a viola
part), and basso continuo. In the second movement of the suite however
only the strings and the continuo play. This is the only movement of
the suite where all other instruments are silent. 

The music of the "Air" is **written on four staves, for first violins,
second violins, violas, and continuo**. The interweaving melody lines of
the high strings contrasts with the pronounced rhythmic drive in the
bass. 

In the late 19th century violinist August Wilhelmj arranged the second
movement of Bach's third Orchestral Suite for violin and an
accompaniment of strings, piano or organ (harmonium). On the score he
had printed auf der G-Saite (on the G string) above the stave for the
solo violin, which gave the arrangement its nickname.

**Wilhelmj's arrangement**

In Wilhelmj's version the piece is transposed down from its original
key (D major) to C major. **Then the part of the first violins is
transposed down a further octave and given to a solo violin that can
play the entire melody on its lowest string, the G string.** The dynamic
markings added by Wilhelmj are more in line with a romantic
interpretation than with the baroque original.

As a violin can't play very loudly in its lowest register, all the
other parts of Bach's music were firmly reduced in Wilhelmj's version:
the keyboard part is to be played staccato and pianissimo, causing the
effects of interweaving melodies and of drive in the bass part to go
lost. In the strings accompaniment version the violins and violas play
muted (con sordino), and the bass part for cellos and double basses is
to be played pizzicato and sempre pianissimo, with the same change in
effect compared to Bach's original.

Later, a spurious story was put about that the melody was always
intended to be played on the G string alone.[1] The violin solo part
of Wilhelmj's arrangement is sometimes played on the counter-tenor
violoncello. As a result of the popularity of the piece, on the G
string remained in the name of various arrangements whether or not a
string instrument playing on its G string was involved. Most of these
versions have in common that the original melody of the first violins
is played in the low register of a solo instrument, accompanied by a
reduction of the material of the other parts of Bach's piece, although
occasionally versions that stay more in line with Bach's original can
go by the same name.
